//virtulization vs containerization
virtulization: create a whole virtual machine on top of a physical machine, thus it takes up a lot of resources
containerization: create a container on top of a physical machine, which takes up a lot less resources


//Docker Architecture
ðŸ”§ 1. Docker Engine(Docker application container Engine)
Docker Engine is the core software that enables all Docker functionalities. It's the runtime that builds and runs containers. It includes three main components:

ðŸ³ 2. Docker Daemon (dockerd)
What it is: It's a background service running on the host machine.
Role:
Listens for Docker API requests.
Manages Docker objects like images, containers, networks, and volumes.
Can communicate with other Docker daemons for swarm clustering.
Example: When you run docker run nginx, the Docker CLI sends that command to dockerd, which pulls the image, creates a container, and starts it.

ðŸ’» 3. Docker CLI
What it is: A command-line interface tool (docker) that users interact with.
Role:
Sends commands to the Docker daemon via the Docker REST API.
Example commands: docker build, docker run, docker ps, etc.


//Docker Installation
sudo apt install docker.io

//Docker Status
sudo systemctl status docker

//Docker commands
docker


sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
ðŸ› ï¸ What It Does
Adds your user to the docker group.
Users in the docker group can run Docker commands without using sudo.


newgrp docker
ðŸ” What It Does
Applies the group membership change (adding your user to the docker group) immediately in your current terminal session.
Without logging out and back in, it starts a new shell with docker group privileges.


docker ps
Lists all running Docker containers on your system.


docker file -> docker image -> docker container
Dockerfile: A text file containing instructions to build a Docker image.
docker build: The command used to create a Docker image from the Dockerfile.
Docker Image: A read-only template that includes the application and its dependencies.
docker run: The command to create and start a container from a Docker image.
Docker Container: A running instance of a Docker image, providing an isolated environment for the application.


docker images
The docker images command is used to list all Docker images available on your local system.



docker login
The docker login command is used to log in to a Docker registry, which is a place where you can store and share Docker images.
You can use docker login to log in to a Docker registry that you have access to, such as Docker Hub or a private registry hosted on your own server.


docker pull <image_name>
The docker pull command is used to download a Docker image from a Docker registry.


ðŸ”¹To delete a single image by name or ID:
docker rmi <image_name_or_id>
ex-> docker rmi javaapp
or
To force delete (even if containers use it):
docker rmi -f <image_name_or_id>


docker build -t javaapp .
The docker build command is used to build a Docker image from a Dockerfile.


docker run javaapp
The docker run command is used to create and start a container from a Docker image.